Bell Hooks, in Black Looks: Race and Representation
<Boston: south End Press, 1992>, 115-31
Chapter7
The Oppositional Gaze
Black Female Spectators
When thinking about black female spectators, I remember being
punished as a child for staring, for those hard intense direct looks
children would give grown-ups, looks that were seen as confrontational,
as gestures of resistance, challenges to authority. The "gaze" has
always been political in my life. Imagine the terror felt by the child who
has come to understand through repeated punishments that one's gaze
can be dangerous. The child who has learned so well to look the other
way when necessary-. Yet, when punished, the child is told by parents,
"Look at me when I talk to you." Only, the child is afraid to look. Afraid
to look, but fascinated by the gaze. There is power in looking.
Amazed the first time I read in history classes that white slaveowners
(men, women, and children) punished enslaved black people
for looking, I wondered how this traumatic relationship to the gaze had
informed black parenting and black spectatorship. The politics of
slavery, of racialized power relations, were such that the slaves were
denied their right to gaze. Connecting this strategy of domination to
that used by grown folks in southern black rural communities where I
grew up, I was pained to think that there was no absolute difference
between whites who had oppressed black people and ourselves. Years
later, reading Michel Foucault, I thought again about these connections,
about the ways power as domination reproduces itself in different
locations employing similar apparatuses, strategies, and mechanisms
of control. Since I knew as a child that the dominating power adults
115
116 BLACK LOOKS
exercised over me and over my gaze was never so absolute that I did
not dare to look, to sneak a peep, to state dangerously, I knew that the
slaves had looked. That all attempts to repress our/black peoples' right
to gaze had produced in us an overwhelming longing to look, a
rebellious desire, an oppositional gaze. By courageously looking, we
deftantly declared: "Not only will I stare. I want my look to change
reality." Even in the worse circumstances of domination, the ability to
manipulate one's gaze in the face of structures of domination that would
contain it, opens up the possibility of agency. In much of his work,
Michel Foucault insists on describing domination in terms of "relations
of power" as part of an effort to challenge the assumption that "power
is a system of domination which controls everything and which leaves
no room for freedom." Emphatically stating that in all relations of power
"there is necessarily the possibility of resistance," he invites i:he critical
thinker to search those margins, gaps, and locations on and through
the body where agency can be found.
Stuart Hall calls for recognition of our agency as black spectators
in his essay "Cultural Identity and Cinematic Representation." Speaking
against the construction of white representations of blackness as totalizing,
Hall says of white presence: "The error is not to conceptualize
this 'presence' in terms of power, but to locate that power as wholly
external to us-as extrinsic force, whose influence. can be thrown off
like the serpent sheds its skin. What Franz Fanon reminds us, in Black
Skin, White Masks, is how power is inside as well as outside:
... the movements, the attitudes, the glances of the Other fiXed me
there, in the sense in which a chemical solution is fixed by a dye.
I was indignant; I demanded an explanation. Nothing happened.
I burst apart. Now the fragments have been put together again by
another self. This "look," from-so to speak-the place of the
Other, fixes us, not only in its violence, hostility and aggression,
but in the ambivalence of its desire.
Spaces of agency exist for black people, wherein we can both interrogate
the gaze of the Other but also look back, and at one another,
naming what we see. The "gaze" has been and is a site of resistance for
colonized black people globally. Subordinates in relations of power
learn experientially that there is a critical gaze, one that "looks" to
document, one that is oppositional. In resistance struggle, the power
of the dominated to assert agency by claiming and cultivating "awareness"
politicizes "looking" relations-one learns to look a certain way
in order to resist.
The Oppositional Gaze 117
When most black people in the United States first had the opportunity
to look at film and television, they did so fully aware that mass
media was a system of knowledge and power reproducing and maintaining
white supremacy. To stare at the television, or mainstream
movies, to engage its images, was to engage its negation of black
representation. It was the oppositional black gaze that responded to
these looking relations by developing independent black cinema.
Black viewers of mainstream cinema and television could chart the
progress of political movements for racial equality via the construction
of images, and did so. Within my family's southern black working-class
home, located in a racially segregated neighborhood, watching television
was one way to develop critical spectatorship. Unless you went to work
in the white world, across the tracks, you learned to look at white
people by staring at them on the screen. Black looks, as they were
constituted in the context of social movements for racial uplift, were
interrogating gazes. We laughed at television shows like Our Gang and
Amos 'n 'Andy, at these white representations of blackness, but we also
looked at them critically. Before racial integration, black viewers of
movies and television eJq>erienced visual pleasure in a context where
looking was also about contestation and confrontation.
Writing about black looking relations in "Black British Cinema:
Spectatorship and Identity Formation in Territories," Manthia Diawara
identifies the power of the spectator: "Every narration places the
spectator in a position of agency; and race, class and sexual relations
influence the way in which this subjecthood is filled by the spectator."
Of particular concern for him are moments of "rupture" when the
spectator resists "complete identification with the film's discourse."
These ruptures define the relation between black spectators and
dominant cinema prior to racial integration. Then, one's enjoyment
of a film wherein representations of blackness were stereotypically
degrading and dehumanizing co-existed with a critical practice that
restored presence where it was negated. Critical discussion of the film
while it was in progress or at its conclusion maintained the distance
between spectator and the image. Black films were also subject to
critical interrogation. Since they came into being in part as a response
to the failure of white-dominated cinema to represent blackness in a
manner that did not reinforce white supremacy, they too were critiqued
to see if images were seen as complicit with dominant cinematic
practices.
Critical, interrogating black looks were mainly concerned with
issues of race and racism, the way racial domination of blacks by whites
118 BLACK LOOKS
overdetermined representation. They were rarely concerned with gender.
As spectators, black men could repudiate the reproduction of racism in
cinema and television, the negation of black presence, even as they
could feel as though they were rebelling against white supremacy by
daring to look, by engaging phallocentric politics of spectatorship.
Given the real life public circumstances wherein black men were
murdered/lynched for looking at white womanhood, where the black
male gaze was always subject to control and/or punishment by the
powerful white Other, the private realm of television screens or dark
theaters could unleash the repressed gaze. There they could "look" at
white womanhood without a structure of domination overseeing the
gaze, interpreting, and punishing. That white supremacist structure that
had murdered Emmet Till after interpreting his look as violation, as
"rape" of white womanhood, could not control black male responses
to screen images. In their role as spectators, black men could enter an
imaginative space of phallocentric power that mediated racial negation.
This gendered relation to looking made the experience of the black
male spectator radically different from that of the black female spectator.
Major early black male independent filmmakers represented black
women in their films as objects of male gaze. Whether looking through
the camera or as spectators watching films, whether mainstream cinema
or "race" movies such as those made by Oscar Micheaux, the black male
gaze had a different scope from that of the black female.
Black women have written little about black female spectatorship,
about our moviegoing practices. A growing body of film theory
and criticism by black women has only begun to emerge. The prolonged
silence of black women as spectators and critics was a response
to absence, to cinematic negation. In "The Technology of Gender,"
Teresa de Lauretis, drawing on the work of Monique Wittig, calls
attention to "the power of discourses to 'do violence' to people, a
violence which is material and physical, although produced by abstract
and scientific discourses as well as the discourses of the mass media."
With the possible exception of early race movies, black female spectators
have had to develop looking relations within a cinematic context that
constructs our presence as absence, that denies the "body" of the
black female so as to perpetuate white supremacy and with it a
phallocentric spectatorship where the woman to be looked at and
desired is "white." (Recent movies do not conform to this paradigm
but I am turning to the past with the intent to chart the development
of black female spectatorship.)
The Oppositional Gaze 119
Talking with black women of all ages and classes, in different
areas of the United States, about their filmic looking relations, I hear
again and again ambivalent responses to cinema. Only a few of the
black women I talked with remembered the pleasure of race movies,
and even those who did, felt that pleasure interrupted and usurped by
Hollywood. Most of the black women I talked with were adamant that
they never went to movies expecting to see compelling representations
of black femaleness. They were all acutely aware of cinematic racismits
violent erasure of black womanhood. In Anne Friedberg's essay "A
Denial of Difference: Theories of Cinematic Identification" she stresses
that "identification can only be made through recognition, and all
recognition is itself an implicit confirmation of the ideology of the status
quo." Even when representations of black women were present in film,
our bodies and being were there to serve--to enhance and maintain
white womanhood as object of the phallocentric gaze.
Commenting on Hollywood's characterization of black women
in Girls on Film, Julie Burchill describes this absent presence:
Black women have been mothers without children (Mammieswho
can ever forget the sickening spectacle of Hattie MacDaniels
waiting on the simpering Vivien Leigh hand and foot and enquiring
like a ninny, "What's rna Jamb gonna wear?") ... Lena Home,
the first black performer signed to a long term contract with a
major (MGM), looked gutless but was actually quite spirited. She
seethed when Tallulah Bankhead complimented her on the paleness
of her skin and the non-Negroidness of her features.
When black women actresses like Lena Home appeared in mainstream
cinema most white viewers were not aware that they were looking at
. black females unless the film was specifically coded as being about
blacks. Burchill is one of the few white women film critics who has
dared to examine the intersection of race and gender in relation to
the construction of the category "woman" in ftlm as object of the
phallocentric gaze. With characteristic wit she asserts: "What does it say
about racial purity that the best blondes have all been brunettes
(Harlow, Monroe, Bardot)? I think it says that we are not as white as we
think." Burchill could easily have said "we are not as white as we want
to be," for clearly the obsession to have white women film stars be
ultra-white was a cinematic practice that sought to maintain a distance,
a separation between that image and the black female Other; it was a
way to perpetuate white supremacy. Politics of race and gender were
inscribed into mainstream cinematic narrative from Birth of A Nation
120 BLACK LOOKS
on. As a seminal work, this ftlm identified what the place and function
of white womanhood would be in cinema. There was clearly no
place for black women.
Remembering my past in relation to screen images of black
womanhood, I wrote a short essay, "Do you remember Sapphire?"
which explored both the negation of black female representation in
cinema and television and our rejection of these images. Identifying the
character of "Sapphire" from Amos 'n 'Andy as that screen representation
of black femaleness I first saw in childhood, I wrote:
She was even then backdrop, foil. She was bitch-nag. She was
there to soften images of black men, to make them seem vulnerable,
easygoing, funny, and unthreatening to a white audience.
She was there as man in drag, as castrating bitch, as someone to
be lied to, someone to be tricked, someone the white and black
audience could hate. Scapegoated on all sides. She was notus. We
laughed with the black men, with the white people. We laughed
at this black woman who was not us. And we did not even long
to be there on the screen. How could we long to be there when
our image, visually constructed, was so ugly. We did not long to
be there. We did not long for her. We did not want our construction
to be this hated black female thing-foil, backdrop. Her black
female image was not the body of desire. There was nothing to
see. She was not us.
Grown black women had a different response to Sapphire; they identified
with her frustrations and her woes. They resented the way she
was mocked. They resented the way these screen images could assault
black womanhood, could name us bitches, nags. And in opposition
they claimed Sapphire as their own, as the symbol of that angry part
of themselves white folks and black men could not even begin to
understand.
Conventional representations of black women have done violence
to the image. Responding to this assault, many black women spectators
shut out the image, looked the other way, accorded cinema no importance
in their lives. Then there were those spectators whose gaze was
that of desire and complicity. Assuming a posture of subordination, they
submitted to cinema's capacity to seduce and betray. They were cinematically
"gaslighted." Every black woman I spoke with who was/is an
ardent moviegoer; a lover of the Hollywood film, testified that to
experience fully the pleasure of that cinema they had to close down
critique, analysis; they had to forget racism. And mostly they did not
think about sexism. What was the nature then of this adoring black
The Oppositional Gaze 121
female gaze-this look that could bring pleasure in the midst of
negation? In her first novel, Tbe Bluest Eye, Toni Morrison constructs a
portrait of the black female spectator; her gaze is the masochistic look
of victimization. Describing her looking relations, Miss Pauline
Breedlove, a poor working woman, maid in the house of a prosperous
white family, asserts:
The onliest time I be happy seem like was when I was in the
picture show. Every time I got, I went, I'd go early, before the
show started. They's cut off the lights, and everything be black.
Then the screen would light up, and I's move right on in them
picture. White men taking such good care of they women, and
they all dressed up in big clean houses with the bath tubs right
in the same room with the toilet. Them pictures gave me a lot
of pleasure.
To experience pleasure, Miss Pauline sitting in the cbrk must imagine
herself transformed, turned into the white woman portrayed on the
screen. After watching movies, feeling the pleasure, she says, "But it
made coming home hard."
We come home to ourselves. Not all black women spectators
submitted to that spectacle of regression through identification. Most
of the women I talked with felt that they c:;onsciously resisted identification
with films-that this tension made moviegoing less than pleasurable;
~t times it caused pain. As one black woman put, "I could
always get pleasure from movies as long as I did not look too deep."
For black female spectators who have "looked too deep" the encounter
with the screen hurt. That some of us chose to stop looking was a
gesture of resistance, turning away was one way to protest, to reject
negation. My pleasure in the screen ended abrupdy when I and my
sisters ftrst watched Imitation of Life. Writing about this experience in
the "Sapphire" piece, I addressed the movie directly, confessing:
I had until now forgotten you, that sc;reen image seen in adolescence,
those images that made me stop looking. It was there in
Imttation of Life, that comfortable mammy image. There was
something familiar about this hard-working black woman who
loved her daughter so much, loved her in a way that hurt. Indeed,
as young southern black girls watching this filin, Peola's mother
reminded us of the hardworking, churchgoing, Big Mamas we
knew and loved. Consequently, it was not this image that captured
our gaze; we were fascinated by Peola.
122 BLACK LOOKS
Addressing her, I wrote:
You were different. There was something scary in this image of
young sexual sensual black beauty betrayed-that daughter who
did not want to be confined by blackness, that "tragic mulatto"
who did not want to be negated. just let me escape this image
forever," she could have said. I will always remember that image.
I remembered how we cried for her, for our unrealized desiring
selves. She was tragic because there was no place in the cinema
for her, no loving pictures. She too was absent image. It was better
then, that we were absent, for when we were there it was humiliating,
strange, sad. We cried all night for you, for the cinema that
had no place for you. And like you, we stopped thinking it would
one day be different.
When I returned to films as a young woman, after a long period
of silence, I had developed an oppositional gaze. Not only would I not
be hurt by the absence of black female presence, or the insertion of
violating representation, I interrogated the work, cultivated a way to
look past race and gender for aspects of content, form, language.
Foreign films and U.S. independent cinema were the primary locations
of my filmic looking relations, even though I also watched
Hollywood films.
From "jump," black female spectators have gone to films with
awareness of the way in which race and racism determined the visual
construction of gender. Whether it was Birth of A Nation or Shirley
Temple shows, we knew that white womanhood was the racialized
sexual difference occupying the place of stardom in mainstream narrative
film. We assumed white women knew it to. Reading Laura Mulvey's
provocative essay, "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema," from a
standpoint that acknowledges race, one sees clearly why black women
spectators not duped by mainstream cinema would develop an
oppositional gaze. Placing ou~lves outside that pleasure in looking,
Mulvey argues, was determined by a "split between active/male and
passive/female." Black female spectators actively chose not to identify
with the film's imaginary subject because such identification was disenabling.
Looking at films with ·an oppositional gaze, black women were
able to critically assess the cinema's construction of white womanhood
as object of phallocentric gaze and choose not to identify with either
the victim or the perpetrator. Black female spectators, who refused to
identify with white womanhood, who would not take on the
phallocentric gaze of desire and possession, created a critical space
The Oppositional Gaze 123
where the binary opposition Mulvey posits of "woman as image, man
as bearer of the look" was continually deconstructed. As critical spectators,
black women looked from a location that disrupted, one akin to
that described by Annette Kuhn in Tbe Power ofTbe Image:
... the acts of analysis, of deconstruction and of reading "against
the grain" offer an additional pleasure--the pleasure of resistance,
of saying "no": not to "unsophisticated" enjoyment, by ourselves
and others, of culturally dominant images, but to the structures of
power which ask us to consume them uncritically and in highly
circumscribed ways.
Mainstream feminist film criticism in no way acknowledges black
female spectatorship. It does not even consider the possibility that
women can construct an oppositional gaze via an understanding and
awareness of the politics of race and racism. Feminist film theory rooted
in an ahistorical psychoanalytic framework that privileges sexual difference
actively suppresses recognition of race, reenacting and mirroring
the erasure of black womanhood that occurs in films, silencing any
discussion of racial difference--of racialized sexual difference. Despite
feminist critical interventions aimed at deconstructing the category
"woman" which highlight the significance of race, many feminist film
critics continue to structure their discourse as though it speaks about
"women" when in actuality it speaks only about white women. It seems
ironic that the cover of the recent anthology Feminism and Film Tbeory
edited by Constance Penley has a graphic that is a reproduction of the
photo of white actresses Rosalind Russell and Dorothy Arzner on the
1936 set of the film Craig:S Wife yet tliere is no acknowledgment in any
essay in this collection that the woman "subject" under discussion is
always white. Even though there are photos ofblackwomen from films
reproduced in the text, there is no acknowledgment of racial difference.
It would be too simplistic to interpret this failure of insight solely
as a gesture of racism. Importantly, it also speaks to the problem of
structuring feminist film theory around a totalizing narrative of woman
as object whose image functions solely to reaffirm and reinscribe
patriarchy. Mary Ann Doane addresses this issue in the essay "Remembering
Women: Psychical and Historical Construction in Film Theory":
This attachment to the figure of a degeneralizlble Woman as the
product of the apparatus indicates why, for many, feminist film
theory seems to have reached an impasse, a certain blockage in
its theorization ... In focusing upon the task of delineating in great
124 BLACK LOOKS
detail the attributes of woman as effect of the apparatus, feminist
film theory partidpates in the abstraction of women.
The concept "Woman" effaces the difference between women in
specific socicrhistorical contexts, between women defined precisely as
historical subjects rather than as a psychic subject (or non-subject).
Though Doane does not focus on race, her comments speak directly to
the problem of its erasure. For it is only as one imagines "woman" in
the abstract, when woman becomes fiction or fantasy, can race not be
seen as significant. Are we really to imagine that feminist theorists
writing only about images of white women, who subsume this specific
historical subject under the totalizing category "woman," do not "see"
the whiteness of the image? It may very well be that they engage in a
process of denial that eliminates the necessity of revisioning conventional
ways of thinking about psychoanalysis as a paradigm of analysis
and the need to rethink a body of feminist film theory that is firmly
rooted in a denial of the reality that sex/sexuality may not be the
primary and/or exclusive signifier of difference. Doane's essay appears
in a very recent anthology, Psychoanalysis and Cinema edited
by E. Ann Kaplan, where, once again, none,of the theory presented
acknowledges or discusses racial difference, with the exception of one
essay, "Not Speaking with Language, Speaking with No Language,"
which problematizes notions of orientalism in its examination of Leslie
Thornton's film Adynata. Yet in most of the essays, the theories
espoused are rendered problematic if one includes race as a category
of analysis.
Constructing feminist film theory along these lines enables the
production of a discursive practice that need never theorize any aspect
of black female representation or spectatorship. Yet the existence of
black women within white supremacist culture problematizes, and
makes complex, the overall issue of female identity, representation, and
spectatorship. If, as Friedberg suggests, "identification is a process
which commands the subject to be displaced by an other; it is a
procedure which breeches the separation between self and other, and,
in this way, replicates the very structure of patriarchy." If identification
"demands· sameness, necessitates similarity, disallows difference"must
we then surmise that many feminist film critics who are "overidentified"
with the mainstream cinematic apparatus produce theories
that replicate its totalizing agenda? Why is it that feminist film criticism,
which has most claimea the terrain of woman's identity, representation,
and subjectivity as its field of analysis, remains aggressively silent on the
subject of blackness and specifically representations of black womanThe
Oppositional Gaze 125
hood? just as mainstream cinema has historically forced aware black
female spectators not to look, much feminist film criticism disallows the
possibility of a theoretical dialogue that might include black women's
voices. It is difficult to talk when you feel no one is listening, when you
feel as though a special jargon or narrative has been created that only
the chosen can understand. No wonder then that black women have
for the most part confined our critical commentary on film to conversations.
And it must be reiterated that this gesture is a strategy that
protects us from the violence perpetuated and advocated by discourses
of mass media. A new focus on issues of race and representation in the
field of film theory could critically intervene on the historical repression .
reproduced in some arenas of contemporary critical practice, making
a discursive space for discussion of black female s~ctatorship possible.
When I asked a black woman in her tv.renties, an obsessive
moviegoer, why she thought we had not written about black female
spectatorship, she commented: "We are afraid to talk about ourselves
as spectators because we have been so abused by 'the g~ze'." An aspect
of that abuse was the imposition of the assumption that black female
looking relations were not important enough to theorize. Film theory
as a critical "turf' in the United States has been and continues to be
influenced by and reflective of white racial domination. Since feminist .
film criticism was initially rooted in a women's liberation movement
informed by racist practices, it did not open up the discursive terrain
and make it more inclusive. Recently, even those white film theorists
who include an analysis of race show no interest in black female
spectatorship. In her introduction to the collection of essays Vssual and
Other Pleasures, Laura Mulvey describes her initial romantic absorption
in Hollywood cinema, stating:
Although this great, previously unquestioned and unanalyzed
love was put in crisis by the impact of feminism on my thought in
the early 1970s, it also had an enormous influence on the development
of my critical work and ideas and the debate within film
culture with which I became preoccupied over the next fifteen
years or so. Watched through eyes that were affected by the
changing climate of consciousness, the movies lost their magic.
Watching movies from a feminist perspective, Mulvey arrived at that
location of disaffection that is the starting point for many black women
approaching cinema within the lived harsh reality of racism. Yet her
account of being a part of a film culture whose roots rest on a founding
relationship of adoration and love indicates how difficult it would have
126 BLACK LOOKS
been to enter that world from "jump" as a critical spectator whose gaze
had been formed in opposition.
Given the context of class exploitation, and racist and sexist
domination, it has only been through resistance, struggle, reading, and
looking "against the grain," that black women have been able to value
our process of looking enough to publicly name it. Centrally, those
black female spectators who attest to the oppositionality of their gaze
deconstruct theories of female spectatorship that have relied heavily on
the assumption that, as Doane suggests in her essay, "Woman's Stake:
Filming the Female Body," "woman can only mimic man's relation to
language, that is assume a position defined by the penis-phallus as the
supreme arbiter oflack." Identifying with neither the phallocentric gaze
nor the construction of white womanhood as lack, critical black female
spectators construct a theory of looking relations where cinematic
visual delight is the pleasure of interrogation. Every black woman
spectator I talked to, with rare exception, spoke of being "on guard" at
the movies. Talking about the way being a critical spectator of Hollywood
films influenced her, black woman filmmaker Julie Dash
exclaims, "I make films because I was such a spectator!" Looking at
Hollywood cinema from a distance, from that critical politicized standpoint
that did not want to be seduced by narratives reproducing her
negation, Dash watched mainstream movies over and over again for
the pleasure of deconstructing them. And of course there is that added
delight if one happens, in the process of interrogation, to come across
a narrative that invites the black female spectator to engage the text
. with no threat of violation.
Significantly, I began to write ftlm criticism in response to the first
Spike Lee movie, She's Gotta Have It, contesting Lee's replication of
mainstream patriarchal cinematic practices that explicitly represents
woman (in this instance black woman) as the object of a phallocentric
gaze. Lee's investment in patriarchal filmic practices that mirror
dominant patterns makes him the perfect black candidate for entrance
to the Hollywood canon. His work mimics the cinematic construction
of white womanhood as object, replacing her body as text on which to
write male desire with the black female body. It is transference without
transformation. Entering the discourse of film criticism from the politicized
location of resistance,· of not wanting, as a working-class black
woman I interviewed stated, "to see black women in the position white
women have occupied in ftlm forever," I began to think critically about
black female spectatorship.
The Oppositional Gaze 127
For years I went to independent and/or foreign fJ.lms where I was
the only black female present in the theater. I often imagined that in
every theater in the United States there was another black woman
watching the same film wondering why she was the only visible black
female spectator. I remember trying to share with one of my five sisters
the cinema I liked so much. She was "enraged" that I brought her to a
theater where she would have to read subtitles. To her it was a violation
of Hollywood notions of spectatorship, of coming to the movies to be
entertained. When I interviewed her to ask what had changed her mind
over the years, led her to embrace this dnema, she connected it to
coming to critical consciousness, saying, "I learned that there was
more to looking than I had been exposed to in ordinary (Hollywood)
movies." I shared that though most of the films I loved were all white,
I could engage them because they did not have in their deep structure
a subtext reprodudng the narrative of white supremacy. Her responSe
was to say that these films demystified "whiteness," since the lives they
depicted seemed less rooted in fantasies of escape. They were, she
suggested, more like "what we knew life to be, the deeper side of life
as well." Always more seduced and enchanted with Hollywood dnema
than me, she stressed that unaware black female spectators must "break
out," no longer be imprisoned by images that enact a drama of our
negation. Though she still sees Hollywood fJ.lms, because "they are a
major influence in the culture" -she no longer feels duped or victimized
Talking with black female spectators, looking at written discussions
either in fiction or academic essays about black women, I noted
the connection made between the realm of representation in mass
media and the capacity of black women to construct ourselves as
subjects in daily life. The extent to which black women feel devalued,
objectified, dehumanized in this sodety determines the scope and
texture of their looking relations. Those black women whose identities
were constructed in resistance, by practices that oppose the dominant
order, were most inclined to develop an oppositional gaze. Now that
there is a growing interest in fJ.lms produced by black women and those
films have become more accessible to viewers, it is possible to talk
about black female spectatorship in relation to that work. So far, most
discussions of black spectatorship that I have come across focus on
men. In "Black Spectatorship: Problems of Identification and Resistance"
Manthia Diawara suggests that "the components of 'difference'"
among elements of sex, gender, and sexuality give rise to different
readings of the same material, adding that these conditions produce
128 BLACK LOOKS
a "resisting" spectator. He focuses his critical discussion on black
masculinity.
The recent publication of the anthology 1be Female Gaze:
Women as Vieu.!Em of Popular Culture excited me, especially as it
included an essay, "Black Looks," by Jacqui Roach and Petal Felix that
attempts to address black female spectatorship. The essay posed provocative
questions that were not answered: Is there a black female gaze?
How do black women relate to the gender politics of representation?
Concluding, the authors assert that black females have "our own reality,
our own history, our own gaze--one which the sees the world rather
differently from 'anyone else.'" Yet, they do not name/describe this
experience of seeing "rather differently." The absence of definition and
explanation suggests they are assuming an essentialist stance wherein
it is presumed that black women, as victims of race and gender
oppression, have an inherently different field of vision. Many black
women do not "see differently" precisely because their perceptions of
reality are so profoundly colonized, shaped by dominant ways of
knowing. As Trinh T. Minh-ha points out in "Outside In, Inside Out":
"Subjectivity does not merely consist of talking about oneself ... be this
talking indulgent or critical."
Critical black female spectatorship emerges as a site of resistance
only when individual black women actively resist the imposition of
dominant ways of knowing and looking. While every black woman I
talked to was aware of racism, that awareness did not automatically
correspond with politicization, the development of an oppositional
gaze. When it did, individual black women consciously named the
process. Manthia Diawara's "resisting spectatorship" is a term that does
not adequa~ely describe the terrain of black female spectatorship. We
do more than resist. We create alternative texts that are not solely
reactions. As critical spectators, black women participate in a broad
range of looking relations, contest, resist, revis;on, interrogate, and
invent on multiple levels. Certainly when I watch the work of black
women fllmmakers Camille Billops, Kathleen Collins, Julie Dash,
Ayoka Chenzira, Zeinabu Davis, I do not need to "resist" the images
even as I still choose to watch their work with a critical eye.
Black female critical thinkers concerned with creating space for
the construction of radical black female subjectivity, and the way
cultural production informs this possibility, fully acknowledge the
importance of mass media, film in particular, as a powerful site for
critical intervention. Certainly Julie Dash's film musrons identifies the
terrain of Hollywood cinema as a space of knowledge production that
The Oppositional Gaze 129
has enormous power. Yet, she also creates a filmic narrative wherein
the black female protagonist subversively claims that space. Inverting
the "real-life" power structure, she offers the black female spectator
representations that challenge stereotypical notions that place us outside
the realm of filmic discursive practices. Within the film she uses
the strategy of Hollywood suspense films to undermine those
cinematic practices that deny black women a place in this structure.
Problematizing the question of "racial" identity by depicting passing,
suddenly it is the white male's capadty to gaze, define, and know
that is called into question.
When Mary Ann Doane describes in "Woman's Stake: Filming the
Female Body" the way in which feminist filmmaking practice can
elaborate "a spectal syntax for a different articulation of the female
body," she names a critical process that "undoes the structure of the
classical narrative through an insistence upon its repressions." An
eloquent description, this prectsely names Dash's strategy in mustons,
even though the film is not unproblematic and works within certain
conventions that are not successfully challenged. For example, the film
does not indicate whether the character Mignon will make Hollywood
films that subvert and transform the genre or whether she will simply
assimilate and perpetuate the norm. Still, subversively, Illusions
problematizes the issue of race and spectatorship. White people in the
film are unable to "see" that race informs their looking relations. Though
she is passing to gain access to the machinery of cultural production
represented by film, Mignon continually asserts her ties to black community.
The bond between her and the young black woman singer
Esther Jeeter is affirmed by caring gestures of affirmation, often expressed
by eye-to-eye contact, the direct unmediated gaze of recognition.
Ironically, it is the desiring objectifying sexualized white male gaze that
threatens to penetrate her "secrets" and disrupt her process. Metaphorically,
Dash suggests the power of black women to make films will be
threatened and undermined by that white male gaze that seeks to
reinscribe the black female body in a narrative of voyeuristic pleasure
where the only relevant opposition is male/female, and the only
location for the female is as a victim. These tensions are not resolved
by the narrative. It is not at all evident that Mignon will triumph over
the white supremacist capitalist imperialist dominating "gaze."
Throughout Illusions, Mignon's power is affirmed by her contact
with the younger black woman whom she nurtures and protects. It is
this process of mirrored recognition that enables both black women to
define their reality, apart from the reality imposed upon them by
130 BLACK LOOKS
structures of domination. The shared gaze of the two women reinforces
their solidarity. As the younger subject, Esther represents a potential
audience for films that Mignon might produce, films wherein black
females will be the narrative focus. Julie Dash's recent feature-length
ftlm Daughters of the Dust dares to place black females at the center of
its narrative. This focus caused critics (especially white males) to
critique the ftlm negatively or to express many reservations. Clearly, the
impact of racism and sexism so over-determine spectatorship-not
only what we look at but who we identify with-that viewers who are
not black females find it hard to empathize with the central characters
in the movie. They are adrift without a white presence in the ftlm.
Another representation of black females nurturing one another
via recognition of their common struggle for subjectivity is depicted in
Sankofa 's collective work Passion of Remembrance. In the film, two
black women friends, Louise and Maggie, are from the onset of the
narrative struggling with the issue of subjectivity, of their place in
progressive black liberation movements that have been sexist. They
challenge old nonns and want to replace them with new understandings
of the complexity of black identity, and the need for liberation
struggles that address that complexity. Dressing to go to a party, Louise
and Maggie claim the "gaze." Looking atone another, staring in mirrors,
they appear completely focused on their encounter with black femaleness.
How they see themselves is most important, not how they will be
stared at by others. Dancing to the tune "Let's get Loose," they display
their bodies not for a voyeuristic colonizing gaze but for that look of
recognition that affirms their subjectivity-that constitutes them as
spectators. Mutually empowered they eagerly leave the privatized
domain to confront the public. Disrupting conventional racist and sexist
stereotypical representations of black female bodies, these scenes
invite the audience to look differently. They act to critically intervene
and transform conventional ftlmic practices, changing notions of
spectatorship. Jausions, Daughters of the Dust, and A Passion of
Remembrance employ a deconstructive ftlmic practice to undermine
existing grand cinematic narratives even as they retheorize subjectivity
in the realm of the visual. Without providing "realistic" positive representations
that emerge only as a response to the totalizing nature of
existing narratives, they offer points of radical departure. Opening up
a space for the assertion of a critical black female spectatorship, they
do not simply offer diverse representations, they imagine new transgressive
possibilities for the formulation of identity.
The Oppositional Gaze 131
In this sense they make explicit a critical practice that provides us
with different ways to think about black female subjectivity and black
female spectatorship. Cinematically, they provide new points of recognition,
embodying Stuart Hall's vision of a critical practice that acknowledges
that identity is constituted "not outside but within
representation," and invites us to see film "not as a second-order mirror
held up to reflect what already exists, but as that form of representation
which is able to constitute us as new kinds of subjects, and thereby
enable us to discover who we are." It is this critical practice that enables
production of feminist film theory that theorizes black female spectatorship.
Looking and looking back, black women involve ourselves in a
process whereby we see our history as counter-memory, using it as a
way to know the present and invent the future.
